Nonnested encryption, disambiguated child pointers & deduplicate using deterministic encryption (#58)
wnfs-wg/spec: rationale/encryption.md

# File Encryption

## Need

A way to encrypt [`PrivateFile` and `PrivateDirectory` blocks](/spec/private-wnfs.md#31-cleartext-data) as well as externalized file content blocks.

> Even though authentication is not strictly necessary, because write access should be managed via namefilter certificates instead of knowledge-of-read-key, it is beneficial to have another layer of principals writing data with write access but without read access.

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure what you're trying to say in this paragraph. It's a run-on sentence, which may be part of the problem? Below is my attempt to break it up, but I'm still not totally certain if I captured what you were trying to say.

```suggestion
Note that authentication is not strictly necessary since write access is managed via PKI-signed certificates instead of knowledge of a secret (like a read key). However, it is often useful to have a layer of principals with write (but not read) access.
```

Author: Thanks! I was missing some words: "another layer of *authentication for* principals".

I'll combine your suggestion and my fix :+1:

## Choice

We chose [AES-GCM] with per-message randomly generated 12-byte initialization vectors, because it is widely supported and implemented in hardware as of 2023.
There are no known practical attacks on AES-GCM.

## Alternatives

### [AES-GCM-SIV]

> Compared to AES-GCM, this mode additionally protects against nonce-misuse via a synthetic initialization vector (SIV). To achieve this, AES-GCM-SIV sacrifices performance during encryption.

Reviewer: In case it's helpful, I often point people at this post. It could make for a good footnote: https://soatok.blog/2020/07/12/comparison-of-symmetric-encryption-methods/

Author: Yep, I think it makes sense to link this!
